hide: false
layout: post
categories: [tools, linux]
title: Linux
---

# Linux

Notes on useful linux functionality as reference for my future self.

## Getting help and finding stuff

- `man <command>` opens the manual for `<command>`.
- `man -k <search term>` lists all commands with `<search term>` in the manual
    pages.
- Search inside manual works as in vim.


## Basics

- A process is a running instance of a program.
- Everything is a fiele (the keyboard is read-only, the screen write only) 

## Permissions

- Three actions: `r` (read), `w` (write), `x` (execute).
- Three types of people: owner (u), group (g), and others (o). (a) applies to
    all types.
- Permission info is 10 characters long: first character is file type (`-` for
    file, `d` for directory), the remaining ones are rwx permissions for owner,
    group, and others, with letter indicating permission on, hyphen
    indicating permission off. 
- Changing persmission: `chmod <for whom><add or remove><permission type>`. Example:
    `chmod g+w` adds write permission for group, `chmod u-x` removes execute permission for
    owner, `chmod a+rwx` grants all permission to everyone. `chmod` stands for
    change file mode bits.
- Shortcuts: Remember the following:
    | Octal    | Binary   |
    | -------- | -------- |
    |        0 |      000 |
    |        1 |      001 |
    |        2 |      010 |
    |        3 |      011 |
    |        4 |      100 |
    |        5 |      101 |
    |        6 |      110 |
    |        7 |      111 |

## Useful commands

- `file` lists file type of all files in a directory

## Bash scripting

Variables
- `'` interpret all content literally, `"` allow for variable substitution.
- `$( command )` saves command output into a variable.
- `export var` makes `var` available to child process.
- `/dev/stdin` reads input from pipe.

Arithmetic
- `let` assigns result of expression to a variable.
- `expr` prints result of expression.
- `$(( expression ))` returns the result of expression.
- `${#var}` returns the length of `var` in characters.

Functions
- `function_name () {
     <commands>
   }` 
   is the basic format (there is also `function function_name {`, but I prefer this.


## Sources
- [Ryan's bash-scripting tutorial](https://ryanstutorials.net/bash-scripting-tutorial/)
- [Ryan's linux tutorial](https://ryanstutorials.net/bash-scripting-tutorial/)

